Abstract
This study was undertaken to complete an initial thermal analysis of a novel space heating 
system based on thermo-geology. This project focused on the addition and removal of heat 
from the earths subsoil, and its impact on the change in entropy and change in internal energy 
of the phases within the soil. The soil model presented was assumed to remain at thermal 
equilibrium throughout this study. As a result, the internal energy, and entropy were reduced 
to the calculated percentage contribution of the total change in the system. 
From the investigation into internal energy, as heat was applied to the model, the vapour 
phase accounted for the majority of the total change in internal energy due to the latent heat 
of vaporization absorbed by the liquid undergoing phase change. This conclusion was also 
drawn for the total entropy change, where the level of disorder increased significantly as the 
liquid phase in the soil model moved into the vapour phase. In contrast, the study into the 
phase change as heat was removed from the soil model indicated that a significant decrease 
in entropy and internal energy of the solid water phase occurred, specifically as a result of the 
significant latent heat released by the liquid water phase on entering the solid phase.
This study goes on to investigate the effect of humidity on the variation in internal energy and 
entropy of the model, drawing the conclusions that as VPD decreases with humidity, the 
phase change within the model reduced as a consequence. The model presented was used to 
show that though the average specific heat capacity of the model increases, the overall heat 
required and therefore entropy change, and internal energy of the model reduces. The 
conclusion drawn is that a soil with a high relative humidity will require significantly less heat 
input to change the temperature of the soil. This indicates that using the soil as a heat 
reservoir for a space heating system would be most effective where the phase change in the 
soil could be controlled as a function of the humidity
上面是abstract的例子，以下是abstract的要求：
All reports start with an abstract, which contains a summary of the project: its aim, what was done
and what was achieved. This document describes the requirements for an MSc project report in the
School of Engineering and gives advice on how to get better marks. It is structured to match a project report as far as possible.
根据例子和要求，写一个abstract：这篇论文使用DNN，通过Dota2英雄选择和英雄装备来预测胜负，分别有5分钟，10分钟，15分钟，20分钟，25分钟和30分钟时的英雄装备和选择情况，预测胜负的正确率随着时间增加逐渐提高，使用30分钟时的数据，预测正确率可以达到80%

Explain the background to the project and the reasons why your particular piece of work was considered worthwhile. This leads to the aims of the project: what you are trying to achieve. Be specific
上面是introduction的要求，以下是introduction的例子:
1.1 Background
The Global Energy Crisis
Across the world, people are becoming more and more aware of the issues associated with 
heating from natural gas, and from other fossil fuels. The potential implications of the release 
of CO2 and other greenhouse gases have been well publicized - yet to this day there has not 
been widespread changes to the carbon based economy within the UK and worldwide. The 
impacts of global warming are likely to be disastrous this century, with weather patterns 
changing worldwide including Tsunamis, Hurricanes as well as widespread flooding and 
drought across most corners of the globe. 
It is therefore imperative at this time that the world focuses on efforts to find alternative, 
sustainable methods not only of power generation, but also of space heating and cooling for 
buildings to reduce the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere. One such alternative 
solution that is available is the use of heat pumps, which are known to harness the heat stored 
in the subsurface of the Earth to generate heat to be used in households and commercial 
buildings with a much lower environmental impact that conventional gas heating. [1]
Harnessing the energy of the Earths subsurface
The specific heat capacity is a unit used to describe the ability of a medium to store heat for 
each degree Kelvin. As the sun warms the Earth using infrared rays in the summer, the 
subsurface is able to store a large amount of the heat within the rocks and soils. The rock type 
varies depending on the particular position of the subsurface in questions, however the 
thermal conductivities vary from 0.3 W m-1 K
-1
for coal up to 7.5 W m-1 K
-1
for quartzite. 
The specific heat capacity is a measure of the ability of a medium to store heat, per degree K; 
therefore a rock type with a high specific heat capacity indicates it has a high capacity to store 
heat. In the colder months of the year, it is therefore possible to extract the heat stored in 
the subsurface with the use of a heat pump, which can drive the temperature of the rocks up 
the temperature gradient to be used in the buildings on the surface of the planet. 
The ambient temperature of the rock can be harnessed as a result of the hydrology typically 
associated with the subsurface. The subsurface of the Earth contains groundwater (with a 
specific heat capacity of around 4.188 kJ (kg K)-1
) which in the UK varies between 7 – 150C at 
a depth of 100m. The ambient temperature of the UK is transmitted through the ground at a 
thermal diffusivity of around 0.05m2 day-1
resulting in an increase of temperature of 2.60C per 
100m of soil. [3]
In Great Britain there are many different types of space heating systems, and the most 
common systems are indicated below in Table 1.
Table 1: Variation in temperature input for heating systems [4]
The most inefficient of these systems is clearly conventional hot water, with energy 
requirements to supply hot water at over 600C. Considering the average room temperature 
of the UK of around 240C, a building with poor insulation will dissipate a lot of that heat to 
the surroundings. From Table 1 it can also be deduced that the temperature of groundwater
is far too low to provide a direct heat supply straight into properties on the surface. Therefore, 
to increase the temperature supplied to the buildings, a compression cycle is required, most 
likely in the form of a heat pump.
The Heat Pump
A water pump is designed to take water from a position of low head, to a position of high 
head by carrying out work, (e.g. electrical, mechanical.) In the same way a heat pump is 
designed with the sole aim of carrying heat from an area of high temperature, to an area of
low temperature – the opposite direction a natural temperature gradient would occur, which 
again requires work to be successful. The diagram below, Figure 1, shows the working parts 
of a heat pump.
Figure 1: The implementation of a heat pump system [4]
Firstly, for a Ground Sourced Heat Pump (GSHP) to work it must have a borehole drilled to 
access the groundwater supply. Via a heat exchanger, the groundwater (7-150C) will exchange 
its heat with a refrigerant capable of transforming into a gas, and so absorbing latent heat 
from the groundwater when they exchange heat. The refrigerant gas is then passed through 
a compressor, which raises its pressure and so increases its temperature, as predicted by 
Boyle’s law.[5] The high temperature gas can then be used in a central heating system to 
provide space heating for buildings. The gas is then passed through an expansion cycle, which 
causes it to condense, releasing its remaining heat, and the liquid refrigerant then completes 
the cycle by returning to the groundwater to be vaporized. Within the system the only 
electricity required is supplied to the compressor, considerably reducing the power required 
for the system and therefore the CO2 emissions from generation.
A typical heat pump in the UK is a large investment, costing between £11,000 - £15,000 for 
complete installation of the heat pump, therefore it is extremely important to ensure that the 
system is designed to ensure maximum efficiency.[1] The smaller the temperature difference 
between the groundwater supply and the central heating network, the more efficient the 
heat pump will be. To measure the efficiency of the heat pump network, the coefficient of 
performance is used (Equation 1).[6]
The coefficient of performance is useful when describing the basic efficiency of a heat pump 
system, however, since the efficiency of a heat pump varies due to a number of 
environmental conditions (e.g. delivery temperature and water inlet temperature), the 
coefficient of performance is not a fixed number, but will vary from day to day depending on 
subsurface temperatures and so will vary from season to season. For a typical ground sourced 
heat pump it is expected that the coefficient of performance will be have a minimum value of 
around 3. This means that for every 1 kW of electrical energy required, 3 kW of heat will be 
generated. This level of efficiency is the reason that GSHP’s are so attractive, however the 
high capital costs of the installation means the level of uptake are relatively low except in 
areas where conventional gas and electricity are unavailable. 
However with climate change continuing unabated, low energy space heating is one of the 
biggest requirements of the coming years. It is therefore important to model the subsoil 
effectively to maximize and utilize the renewable heat available from the Earth.
The chemical equilibrium of the subsurface of the Earth
Within the subsurface of the Earth there are a number of phases of state. Contained within 
the soil and the rock water will be present as a solid within the structure of soil itself, trapped 
alongside molecules of air, and between clay and mineral particles. Along with that there will 
be channels of water able to run as a liquid, as well as water vapour and gas present 
throughout the system. Therefore, to be able to model the soil as accurately as possible, it is 
important to have a complete understanding of the principles of chemical equilibrium 
associated with this system. At equilibrium we can use measureable qualities in 
thermodynamics to investigate how the phases of the Earths subsurface interact with one 
another, it is these quantities that will be utilized in this project in an effort to model 
unsaturated soils. 
Figure 2: Three phase model of the soil
The diagram above indicates the soil model that will be presented within this study. A three 
phase model based on 25% air, 25 % liquid (water), and 50% solid (quartz). Typically less than 
5% of the total soil tends to come from organic matter such as living materials, and 
decomposing plant litter, therefore these were omitted from this study. [7]

1.2 Outline
Section 1 of this project discusses the problems affecting the world’s energy supplies and a 
potential solution to the global energy crises in the form of thermo-geology, along with its 
potential implementation using ground sourced heat pumps. The soil model to be 
investigated within this project is then introduced as well as the concept of chemical 
equilibrium within the subsurface of the earth and its importance to this study.
Section 2 discusses the theoretical background behind this project, introducing the method 
of investigating phase change within the soil, before discussing the effects this will have on 
the average specific heat capacity of the soil. Furthermore, the impact of humidity on the 
phase change within the soil is discussed, and its effects on the heat capacity. Section 2 
continues to discuss the theory behind internal energy change and entropy change as heat is 
applied or removed from the model at thermal equilibrium.
Section 3 presents the results and discussion from all the investigationsin this project. Initially
the results from the study into phase change within the soil model is presented and discussed. 
Continuing to detail the results from the studies into the variation in entropy and internal 
energy of the soil model as heat is added. The results from the investigation into the removal 
of heat from the soil are then given, and the impact upon phase composition of the ice are 
given and discussed. Finally a study is carried out into the impact of humidity upon the soil 
model, and the subsequent variation in entropy change and internal energy change within 
the soil are given, along with the implications of the study.
Section 4 provides the main conclusions of this project.
Finally, the data used within this project to provide the final results of this project are given 
in the Appendices. Appendix A presents the data used to calculate the phase change within 
the soil. Appendix B shows the variation in specific heat capacity of this study. Appendices C 
and D provide the data used in the investigation into the variation in entropy and internal 
energy of the soil model as heat is added. Appendix E presents the data used to calculate the 
variation in entropy and internal energy of the soil model as heat is removed from it, and 
Appendix F provides the data used to calculate the impact upon entropy and internal energy 
of the soil model due to the impact of humidity.
